學力非學歷，為何 Google不愛高材生？


世界公民文化中心

個人成長

達志

2019-01-10

+A
-A
加入收藏



 

全球最嚮往進駐的公司Google卻高喊：「我們不愛高材生。」為何Google背道而馳？進入本文前，請先想想以下單字：

a) 認知

b) 零散

c) 有意的

Great scores and degrees are almost equal to success and ability, but Google, as has been said to be “the company people aspire to” does not seem to think in that way.

成績優異與高學歷等同於象徵成功與能力，但這間讓人鑽破頭嚮往進入的公司Google似乎不這麼認為。

In an interview earlier this year, Laszlo Bock, the senior vice president of people operations for Google, said that “Successful, bright people rarely experience failure, and so they don’t learn how to learn from that failure.” To Google, learning ability is way more important than learning achievements. Laszlo Bock said that “For every job, though, the No. 1 thing we look for is general a) cognitive ability, and it’s not IQ. It’s learning ability. It’s the ability to process 1) on the fly and to pull together b) disparate bits of information.”

Google人力資源部高級副總裁Laszlo Bock在上半年的訪談中表示，高材生在人生競賽中無往不利，往往導致他們無法從失敗中學習。他們認為，「學力」比所謂的「學歷」重要的多。


Laszlo Bock說：「無論是什麼職位，我們都優先考量認知能力，不是智商，而是學習力-能快速處理和整合零散的資訊。」

Top degrees cannot ensure that holiday have the “smartest” performances in the office. Studies have shown that top college graduates tend to have more active left brain, which controls logic and knowledgeacquisition. However, the connection between top degrees and active right brain, which controls creativity and imagination, is not as clear. Good students are good at controlling, reasoning and planning, which enable them to come top at tests and in various competitions. However, being focused on “the established achievement” too much could cause a lack of personality and creativity. This situation happens more in Asian society.

高材生不見得是辦公室中最「聰明」的人。研究顯示，高學歷畢業生擅長活躍於主導邏輯和獲取知識的左腦。然而, 優異的成績和主宰創意及思維的右腦之前沒有顯著的關聯。高材生多半擅長掌控、推理以及策略發展，他們往往在考試以及各種競賽型活動上表現優異。但過度注重成績及所謂的「既定成就」，反而造成性格及創造能力上的缺失。亞洲社會中，這樣的情形尤其嚴重。

Bock added in another interview that his belief is not that one shouldn’t go to college. Most people do not put enough thought into why they’re going and what they want to achieve. They go to college because it seems to be the right thing to do. “The first and most important thing is to be explicit and c) willful in making the decisions about what you want to get out of this investment in your education.”

Bock補充，他並不認為大學教育沒價值。而是大多數人沒想清楚為什麼要上大學，和想得到什麼。僅因為似乎是正確的事而去上大學。「最重要的是明確知道自己能從教育這項投資中獲得什麼。」

In every 10-personteam in Google, there are 1 or 2 people without degrees. Those who are not trapped by traditional education or who “work it out without degrees” sometimes have more outstanding personalities. We can think ofit this way: If a person is not 2) confined to scores, maybe a higher learning ability can be trained.

在Google的每個工作小組中，每10人就有1至2人不具有大學學歷。那些不被正統教育框限亦或「不靠學歷拼出一番成就」的人，常具有更突出的人格特質。在東方社會極力追逐學位的同時，不妨想想，人若不被成績分數所框限，或許能夠培養出了更高的學習力。